---
layout: post
title: "Ajax and APIs"
class: W Sep.1
date: 2015-09-01 00:00:01
---

## Ajax

AJAX stands for Asynchronous JavaScript and XML.

Let's break that down:

* _JavaScript_
  Well this one's obvious. We're working in JavaScript.
* _XML_
  This refers to retrieving XML from somewhere. So at this point, we're retrieving XML with JavaScript. In fact, this is a lie. We'll be using AJAX to retrieve JSON. No one says AJAJ, though.
* _Asynchronous_
  We learned about asynchronous coding before when we discussed I/O in Node. This is the exact same idea. We know that we need to use asynchronous techniques when doing things that could take a long time.

As you can probably tell, the definition doesn't paint the whole picture. This happens pretty frequently with _buzzwords_ in technology.

AJAX is a buzzword that arose during the _web 2.0_ revolution describing techniques used to allow web pages to interact with a server, doing work on the user's behalf without the web browser navigating to a new page.

AJAX incorporates:

* Avoiding page reloads and favoring dynamic content changes
* Asynchronous HTTP requests created in web browsers via JavaScript
* Applications remaining usable during asynchronous network operations
* Processing of data, usually XML, JSON, HTML, or plain text to update page content

### Usage

We'll explore the basics of ajax with the demo [here](https://github.com/portlandcodeschool/jsi-tiny-servers/tree/master/ajax), but two very simple examples are below.


You can use the built in [`XMLHttpRequest`][mdn-xhr] object like this:

{%highlight javascript%}
var request = new XMLHttpRequest();
request.onload = function() {
    console.log(this.responseText);
};
request.open("get", "https://google.com");
request.send();

{%endhighlight%}

Or you can use a [jQuery method][jquery-ajax] like this:

{%highlight javascript%}
var request = $.ajax("https://google.com");
request.done(function(response) {
	console.log(response)
})
{% endhighlight %}


### Exercise

 Use jQuery's ajax methods to retrieve your own profile from [Treehouse]
[treehouse].  The URL for a user is `https://teamtreehouse.com/username.json`
for some `username`.

You'll need to store the resulting object somewhere and eventually assimiliate it into a data structure with multiple users.  For now, just put in in a global variable so that you can inspect the object in your browser console.


<aside>
**Content Types**

HTTP requests and responses have the ability to define a content type. You can use that content type to determine how to process the response. Sometimes the content type will something you can control, sometimes it won't. We can discuss _HTTP Content-Type header_ and _MIME types_ more if you'd like.
</aside>

## REST

Reading a definition of what Representation State Transfer (REST) is will make your head spin. It's wordy and technical and all that jazz. In fact, you'll probably find multiple definitions.

REST was originally meant something slightly different. Some programmers started using it to describe APIs they were creating, and it caught on. Now we have many RESTful services, and the differences are overlooked. In general, though, these are the properties of a RESTful API:

* URIs represent resources/objects/nouns
* Multiple data formats available: JSON, XML
* HTTP verbs to interact with resources
  - POST - Create
  - GET - Read
  - PUT - Update
  - DELETE - Delete

Here are a few examples of RESTful requests:

    POST   /api/photos
    GET    /api/photos/23
    PUT    /api/photos/23
    DELETE /api/photos/23


For now the important thing to realize is that you may need to change the verb you're using to get an API to work.

Eventually, you'll build your own APIs and you'll need to distinguish different requests as you define how users will interact with your API.

<aside>
**HTTP Verbs**

The HTTP specification actually states how POST, GET, PUT, and DELETE should interact with resources. There's little consequence to not using the verbs correctly. In fact, it's been difficult to build services that use them in the past. So we've seen the verbs ignored and/or abused. To some extent REST is simply a buzzword that's gotten us to re-focus on these definitions. Proposals for additions to the HTTP spec are still being worked out, so things are still being explored and changing.

**CRUD**

[CRUD][crud] (Create, Read, Update, Delete) is a term used to discuss actions that can be taken when working with data that is persisted. We'll come back to this when discussing databases and persistence.
</aside>

### APIs

Many services these days are offering REST APIs. The quality of documentation will vary. Also, there will be certain APIs that require API keys in order to use them. API keys just allow the service to track/limit your usage of the API according to their rules.

### Challenge

Play around with the [Foursquare API demo][foursquare-demo] in the ajax demo repo.

Build some simple display of a set of results -- for example, display one photo from each venue with a caption that includes the venue's name and a URL if available.

_Hint:_ Notice that the Foursquare demo uses [JSONP][jsonp] instead of JSON.

<aside>
**JSONP**

JSONP allows web applications to make requests to other servers without running into cross-domain security issues that arise with JSON. It works by transforming a simple JSON object, like `{"age": 23 }` into a piece of JavaScript that passes that JSON object into a callback, e.g. `recordPerson({"age": 23});`. That JavaScript is then inserted into a `<script>` element, which allows you to get around the [_same-origin policy_][same-origin].
</aside>

[foursquare-demo]: https://github.com/portlandcodeschool/jsi-tiny-servers/blob/master/ajax/foursquare-demo.html
[jquery-ajax]: https://api.jquery.com/jQuery.ajax/
[treehouse]: https://teamtreehouse.com
[mdn-xhr]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/XMLHttpRequest
[jsi-gamelib-package]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/portlandcodeschool/jsi-gamelib/master/package.json
[jsonp]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSONP
[same-origin]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Same-origin_policy
[crud]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete
